doc/md/guides: ds-103 for mysql (#1227)
ariga/atlas: doc/md/guides/mysql/ds-103.md

---
id: mysql-ds-103
title: Preventing accidental column deletion on MySQL
slug: /guides/mysql/checks/DS103
tags: [linting, ci, destructive-change, mysql, drop-column]
---

## Introduction

This document describes in detail the detection of dropping non-virtual

> columns for MySQL databases by Atlas's lint capabilities.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
columns for MySQL databases by Atlas's linting capabilities.
```

> MySQL allows users to modify existing table structure using the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
MySQL allows users to modify existing table structures using the 
```

[`ALTER TABLE`](https://dev.mysql.com/doc/refman/8.0/en/alter-table.html)
statement. Using this statement, users can drop columns that are
no longer needed. For example:

```text
ALTER TABLE t DROP COLUMN c;
```

While this is sometimes desired, deleting a column from an active database

> can have various forms negative impact on application which we describe below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can have various forms of negative impact on an application which we describe below.
```

To prevent damage to production databases, many teams employ a policy that
prohibits dropping columns (or database resources altogether).  Atlas's 
[migrate lint](/versioned/lint) can help teams automatically detect migrations
that drop columns during continuous integration. For example:

```text
atlas migrate lint --dev-url mysql://root:pass@localhost:3306/dev --latest 1
```

May detect:

```text
20221023123017.sql: destructive changes detected:

	L1: Dropping non-virtual column "c2"
```

## Impact of dropping columns

### Data loss

> Destructive changes are changes to a database schema that result in loss of data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Destructive changes are changes made to a database schema that result in loss of data.
```

For instance, consider a statement such as:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `users` DROP COLUMN `email_address`;
```

This statement is considered destructive because whatever data is stored 
in the email_address column will be deleted from disk, with no way to recover it.
If this happens accidentally during a schema change, the business
impact of this change may be dire. 

Contrary to many other types of changes, dropping a column is not a reversible

> operation. In other words, the "reverse" statement of the above statement is

Reviewer: ```suggestion
operation. In other words, the "reverse" statement of the one above is
```

not a symmetric operation. Consider this statement:

```sql
ALTER TABLE `users` ADD COLUMN `email_address` varchar(255);
```

Running this query may "roll-back" the column drop operation, but any

> data which was stored in this column will be lost.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
data stored in this column will be lost.
```

### Backwards Incompatibility

In the past, it was acceptable in many situations to stop an application
for short maintenance windows during which database administrators could

> apply changes to the database schema. After the changes were applied a new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
apply changes to the database schema. After the changes were applied, a new
```

> version of the application which expects the new schema would be started. 

Reviewer: Rewrite sentence? I think you're missing a piece :)

Author: I think the sentence is correct.. how would you say it?

> version of the application which expects the new schema would be started. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
version of the application, depending on the new schema, would be deployed. 
```

Today, most applications that serve traffic via the internet are expected 

> to be available 24/7 making such maintenance windows unacceptable. Dropping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
to be available 24/7, making such maintenance windows unacceptable. Dropping
```

> a column while an application that relies on it is still running will cause

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a column while running an application that relies on it will cause
```

the database to return errors. This type of change is also known as a 
backwards-incompatible change. 

#### ERROR 1054 (42S22): Unknown column

Suppose we dropped a column named "name". A running application may rely
on this column to be present and try to read or write records including it:

```sql
insert into  t (id, name) values (1,2);
--- OR
select name from t;
```
MySQL will return:
```text
ERROR 1054 (42S22): Unknown column 'name' in 'field list'
```

## Prevention

Preventing accidental column deletion is easy with Atlas's [`migrate lint`](/versioned/lint)
command. With the `atlas migrate lint` command, users can analyze the migration directory to 
detect potentially dangerous changes to the database schema. This command may be 
incorporated in continuous integration pipelines to enable teams to enforce 
desired policies with regard to schema changes.

When using migrate lint to analyze migrations, users must supply multiple parameters:

> * `--dev-url` - a URL to a Dev-database that will be used to simulate the changes and verify their correctness.

Reviewer: Link to dev database

* `--dir` - the URL of the migration directory, by default it is file://migrations, e.g a directory named migrations in the current working directory.

### Changeset detection

When we run the lint command, we need to instruct Atlas on how to decide what set of migration files to analyze. 

> Currently, two modes are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, two modes are supported:
```
